It's coming at 3:00. We know you're deliberating it.
Hillary,
hopefully you can hear me. If you could please accept the invitation
to be a panelist that's coming through from the committee, that'd
be great.
The other thing we can do is just allow her to talk, but delete the video.
Yeah, we might have to do that. Okay.
It's not going, is
it?
Mm-mm.
That
was it.
Is
she a panelist or no?
Okay.
Hi, Hillary, can you hear me?
I can hear you. Can you hear me?
We can.
Awesome.
Fantastic. Hey, look, you've got five minutes and it goes pretty quickly,
and you can take your submission as read.
So if you want to leave some time for questions, that would be fantastic.
Awesome. No worries.
First of all, my name's Hilary Pritchard. I'm born and bred in New Zealand.
I go back about 13 generations. Our family come from orchards
or farming as such, and environmental has been in our
life for a long time. I'm 46 as it is.
I've been fishing since I was a little kid, and you can clearly see that our oceans
are struggling. I am dumbfounded after the
video cameras of deep sea trawling have been released,
that a country so beautiful as ours, and the rules and the regulations
that we use in our country, are even contemplating letting that into
our seawaters.
I think deep sea trawling just destroys everything
and anything in that environment, and I don't think it's fair to us or to
our future generations that we allow businesses to come in
and do that. I think a lot in this bill is wrong, and
I think none of it is there to protect the oceans or to protect us as New
Zealanders. I don't think allowing fishing companies or commercial
fishing companies to be able to pull over to the next year
or roll over their fish so that they can catch more the limit or downsizing
the fish as the limit is the solution out of this problem.
I think we need to have a look into our oceans more and understand
what is going on, how we can do this more sustainable so we can bring
in fishing into New Zealand. It does make a lot of money.
It is an extremely fun thing, and all of us, as humans and New
Zealanders, should be entitled to be able to do that.
I think one of the other things that I'd like to bring up is
that for the long term effect of trawling, we don't actually know
what's going to happen. So I think to allow something like that and just hope that
we can correct it in the long term is just silly.
I am a big believer of doing a no fish for quite a few
years, but I also understand that's unrealistic.
But our oceans are very important.
And the bottom of the ocean, with the sea corals and the environments and
the ecosystems, is definitely something that we need to protect.
I'm happy with a couple of questions, and then I'm quite happy to save my face.
Oh, no, if you've still got more to say, you go for it.
I have a whole lot more, boys.
Okay. No, that's-
A lot of it is I think we all understand as well that we've
seen deep sea trawling around the world. We've seen the effect that it can have.
The byproducts, for instance, with sailfish, once we increased
those, all of a sudden we had more being increased to the
bycatches, which I think as well is
a massive problem. I don't think game fish should be anywhere near
commercial fishing are allowed.
And for any New Zealander who's seen any footage of the
cameras that is on those trawling nets,
I would be shocked that anybody would think that it's a great idea to do in our
waters.
I think it's money that we could invest into the fishing comp...
transformation that we need to know.
And I think as well that we could amend, just demolish the
bill until we do figure out what is going on in our oceans.
I think a fair part of being New Zealand is being able
to just catch a fishing rod and go out and catch a few fish for your
kaimoana and bring it home.
Reducing
the legal size limit of fish in an area, to me, suggests that that
area is possibly out fished.
I don't know how it would make sense to just start fishing smaller ones,
as I think taking away the babies or the breeders is obviously going to deplete
those fish
in that area. I think that's a very scary thing to have in our
waters.
I also believe that
our oceans themselves, being so close to Antarctica and where we are,
I know that we are polluted. I know that we have all the problems that the rest of
the world does as well. But as New Zealanders, I'm kind of hoping that we all do
the right thing and realize that we should be protecting our oceans in
any form that we can. And fish, the corals,
everything that's even at the bottom of the ocean, the microorganisms, the
ecosystems, it's all as important as it is out here.
We do enough on our lands with protecting ecosystems.
I think we need to start doing it now in our oceans.
When you can follow people like Matt Watson, who really do make a change in New
Zealand and make you question what the laws and the rules and what
should be going on, and you look at somebody who's lived off seafood for a long
time and moved to a beautiful place in Northland.
For him to
be fine and everybody else to be fine, you can't catch any crayfish for
the next five years so the population can come back.
That's amazing that we can do that as
people and as humans. So let's keep those trawlers out,
get them out of our country, change this bill, listen to all the New
Zealanders, and realize that this is not a smart idea for New Zealand.
Fantastic. Thank you so much for your time, Hilary, and for your submission.
We really appreciate it.
Awesome. Have a great day.
You, too. Ka kite.
Ka kite.
Okay, Terence Robert Harper.
He gets called Robert, obviously.
There we are. We did it.
Kia ora.
Can you hear me?
Oh, kia ora. Is it Terence or Robert?
Terence. My official first name is Robert, though, but I go as Terence.
So thank you.
Okay. Fantastic. Hi, Terence.
Kia ora.
Hey, look, we've got five minutes, which goes pretty quickly.
Yes.
So if you want to leave time for questions, then keep your
opening statements pretty brief.
And we have read your submission
Fantastic. Thank you. So kia ora, and thank you very much for listening to me
today. My name's Terrence Harper.
I live on the North Shore here in Auckland with my wife and four kids,
and I'm here today because of my love and passion for the ocean, and to
emphasize to you that the ocean is a resource valued by people of
all nationalities and all cultures, and that it's our collective
responsibility to protect it for future generations.
I'm here to express my total opposition to this bill and request that the
whole bill is thrown out and not progressed further.
While it's stated to grow the value of the seafood sector exports, I believe we
should be a country leading the world in environmental protection,
not one that is going backwards and prioritizes short-term commercial
gain at the cost of long-term ecological and economic
health. If enacted, I feel you're destroying our New
Zealand ocean for my children and for future generations.
If I can be a little bit more specific about some of the items in the bill,
I'm deeply concerned about simplifying and making a more responsive management
system. This, I feel, can lead to changing catch limits really
quickly, to suit market conditions, but ultimately they will
decimate those fish stocks, which are actually long-term
things that need to be sorted. The biological reality of marine generation is
long-term. Also, I formally oppose the amendment to
revoke minimum size limits for those 10 different fin
fish. I feel it's scientifically illogical to take
smaller fish before they've had a chance and an opportunity to
spawn. I also want to advocate for unifying a standard for
catch for commercial and recreational.
To have one rule for commercial, for example, snapper 25
centimeters, yet for recreational 30 centimeters
is, in my view, illogical, and we need to allow the time
for those fish to breed and replenish in our waters.
I also want to formally say I oppose the barriers to
transparency and justice.
If fishing boats are operating in international waters or New Zealand waters,
they should be allowed to have full public scrutiny of their
operations. If they're doing nothing wrong, they have nothing to hide,
and so if they're wanting to hide what they are doing, it feels to the public that
they've got something to hide. So we should be able to view those cameras at
any time via the OIA.
Also, allowing more than 20 days to get the
evidence together and get a lawyer and stuff to oppose breaches, I
think we need to keep allowing.
Also want to formally oppose allowing bycatch to be
dumped at sea, effectively legalizing dumping.
90% of our catch is exported for profit overseas,
and yet many New Zealanders face food insecurity.
I advocate for a no dumping policy where every fish
caught is brought to port. If it cannot be sold under the quota system,
for example, they are too small, they should be donated to local charities and
food banks to feed our own communities.
This would also incentivize commercial fishing to target the right
size fish, because if they're catching a boatload or a hull worth
of undersized fish, they can't sell it. That's bad economically.
So this incentivizes them to catch the right size
fish. So my feeling in conclusion, the ocean is a shared
resource that must be managed with a vision beyond the next fiscal
quarter. Short-term commercial gains that decimate our stocks will
inevitably lead to long-term economic failure.
I urge this committee and to lead New Zealand towards genuine
environmental protection, prioritizing local food security over
commercial flexibility. Thank you, and I welcome any questions.
Thank you very much, Terrence.
Yeah, thank you.
Does anyone have any questions?
Jo, any questions?
Well, it was obviously such- No. Thank you. It was a really clear submission.
So yeah. Tried to keep it nice and tight, so I know you've got a lot to get through
today.
Yeah. Excellent. Thank you very much.
Thank you. Thanks for hearing me. All the best for the rest of the sessions.
You're welcome.
Hi, Candice.
Hi. Kia ora.
Kia ora. So you've got five minutes.
If you want to leave time for questions, that's entirely up to you, and yeah, this
floor is yours.
Thank you. So look, thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
I strongly oppose the Fisheries Amendment Bill,
and in doing so, I've got four key concerns that, in my view, go to
the heart of what this bill represents, and why it shouldn't
proceed.
So firstly, I believe the bill's moving against the flow
of the global tide. It represents a clear
regression, in my view, in New Zealand's environmental management.
If we look internationally, responsible countries and unions
are strengthening protections, not weakening them.
This includes the EU, our Pacific nations, and Australia.
Globally, governments, including this one, have committed to
protect at least 30% of the ocean and to minimize the
impacts of fishing on ecosystems through the Global Ocean Treaty.
The common global theme is better protection,
more selective fishing methods, and stronger oversight.
New Zealand's built its identity on being clean, green, and
environmentally responsible,
but I believe that this bill moves us in the opposite
direction. It reduces scrutiny,
it weakens the safeguards, and it fails to
address the real issue of indiscriminate fishing
methodsSo I believe that the bill is not just out of
step with international best practice, it's actually out of
step with what we say we stand for
as New Zealanders.
Secondly,
in restricting access to information and
onboard camera footage, the bill removes public
scrutiny.
Now, that's a backward step.
Transparency is fundamental to public trust.
It will mean that there's no meaningful accountability.
We know from experience that transparency and monitoring
changes behavior.
If we remove that transparency and public scrutiny,
I believe it will undermine compliance
and create an even greater sense of mistrust
in our commercial fishing industry.
Thirdly, the proposal to allow the capture and
retention of undersized fish
is a significant step away from sustainability.
The purpose of size limits is straightforward: to ensure that
fish can reach maturity and breed before they are
caught.
By allowing the landing and capture and sale
of previously discarded fish,
you will only encourage the catching of undersized or non-target
species. It will increase the bycatch.
We now know that the EU's own landing policy has not
driven the behavioral change that they had hoped for,
so our regulatory focus should be on reducing the bycatch,
not increasing it.
Fourthly, and in my view, most importantly, this bill fails to
address the real issue, the non-selective and
indiscriminate fishing methods.
Large-scale methods such as bottom trawling and other non-selective
techniques capture juvenile fish before they breed.
They result in significant bycatch of non-target species,
and they damage our marine habitats that are essential
for sustaining fish populations.
But this bill does nothing to address that.
Instead, it makes it easier to deal with the consequences of
indiscriminate fishing,
and that's the wrong focus.
I've seen over the course of my lifetime the significant depletion of fish
stocks in the Hauraki Gulf and elsewhere, and my view
is that this bill will exacerbate that.
We now know more than ever the importance of
protecting our marine ecosystem to ensure the
health of our planet.
This bill is not based on sustainability objectives
or on the protections that are required, which should be the focus
of modern-day fisheries reform.
It's designed purely to increase profitability for a few,
and it does appear manifestly corrupt.
So I'm calling for a different approach.
Rather than weakening safeguards, I believe that we should be
strengthening monitoring and transparency.
We should be maintaining protections that allow fish to reproduce,
and most importantly, to undertake an inquiry into how
the commercial sector can transition towards a
more selective fishing method. And I think we can look
to Australia for that.
So in closing, this bill is not just a
technical reform,
it's a signal about what we value.
Do we value short-term profit for a few or long-term
sustainability that will benefit all?
So I'm urging the committee to reject the bill in its current form,
and instead to pursue reforms that genuinely protect our oceans,
our fisheries, and the interests of our future generations.
Thank you.
Thank you very much for your comprehensive and heartfelt summation,
Candice. We really appreciate your time today.
Thanks.
Byron
Winsdale?
Winslade.
Oh, Winsla--
Winsdale?
Winslade.
Winslade. Yeah.
Oh, sorry.
Oh.
All good. So you can hear me and see me?
Yes, Erin. Hi.
Hi.
So yeah, I've filled out the submission.
I used to be a fisheries observer,
so I've got quite a good firsthand knowledge of New Zealand commercial fisheries.
And it was common knowledge when I was an observer that
boats that had observers caught more
birds and discarded more fish
than boats without observers.
And it's
common knowledge. But why is that?
Because fishermen are incentivized to not
necessarily tell the truth all the time.
And so the big problem I have with this bill is
the camera footage I think needs to be available
to the public because the
fishers need to be held accountable. So yeah, that's the main issue I have.
And the other problem I have is with the undersized fish.
I think potentially they're just creating a market for these
fish, maybe even incentivize catching them.
So I think that would be a backward step.
So but yeah, those are the main two issues I have.
Yeah. And if you have any questions.
I do, Suze.
Yes. Thank you, Jo. Jo Luxon has a question
Thank you, Erin. You did note that boats that
had observers-
Mm-hmm
... caught more birds.
Mm-hmm.
And those that didn't have observers
didn't. Can you just explain how that works, please?
Well, they weren't being reported.
But
unless an observer was on board, the fishers weren't reporting
seabird bycatch.
Mm-hmm.
And that's
what happens.
Oh, so you-
They just didn't catch it
... so you said that those that...
So can I just check, so the ones that
did have observers, as I
heard you say-
Yes
... caught more birds.
Reported-
Or did you mean those that had observers didn't catch more birds?
No, the ones that had observers reported a higher rate
of catching seabirds.
Okay. And the reason for that is because the observers were reporting them.
Oh, thank you. I get it now, yeah.
The boats that didn't have observers-
Right. Thank you.
Yeah. Okay. So they basically-
Yeah, great. Thank you. Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah. Thank you.
Thanks, Erin. And Miles Anderson has a
question as well.
Yeah.
Yeah, thanks for your submission, Erin.
About the
market, you're talking about the market for undersized fish.
Could you expand on that a bit? You're-
Well, take kingfish, for example.
A legal kingfish is,
for a recreation person, 75 centimeters, which is quite a big fish.
So you could easily...
A 50 or 60 centimeter kingfish would be quite a nice size
fish for the table.
So yeah, you could easily create a market.
If you go somewhere like Japan where these fish are actually farmed, that's the
common size.
Yep. Okay.
You'll see them in the supermarket.
Other species that you could think of as well?
Like snapper.
They farm snapper, too. So,
I could easily imagine a smaller fish like that.
Especially with a lot of immigrants in New Zealand,
they cook fish differently. They will often just cook it whole.
So I think fishermen are fishing to make money.
That's their job. So any way that they can
make as much money as they can, they will.
And
we shouldn't be surprised, but we need to make sure
that
their interests aren't put ahead of the interests of the New Zealand public.
Thank you.
So I've just got a kind of a sup on that.
So would you be more inclined to support that part of the legislation if they
were still required to bring in the undersized catch, but they weren't allowed to
sell it?
Yes.
But it still, it came, so it was put against their quota, but they didn't have a
right to sell it.
Yes.
Thank you. Thanks very much for your time, Erin. That was really helpful.
No worries. Okay. Thank you.
Ka kite.
Okay, bye.
Mia Elliot.
We're nearly ready for you, Matthew.
Gosh.
Been very patient.
Learning a lot.
She's on Zoom. She just needs to turn on her video and microphone.
She's got no microphone.
Oh, sorry, Mia. Oh, yes.
Yeah, there we go.
We can hear you, and if you want to turn your camera on, you're welcome to.
Oh, there. Yeah.
There we go.
Fantastic.
Hi.
Hi. Um-
Right, you've got five minutes. The floor is yours.
Cool. My name's Mia. I'm from Taupō Nui Atea College.
I'm year 12.
I strongly oppose this bill. There's a lot of things I've been
thinking about with it,
and it's just so many things that aren't quite right.
I might not be
experienced as everyone else who's coming to the table, and I know you've already
sat through many amazing people's voices and hearing their viewpoints,
but
what I do have is a voice, and I have another viewpoint.
I'm a generation that is dealing with this, and
I have to grow up with these issues that have been put into our world.
And the next generation, our rangatahi,
they have to deal with this. They have to grow into it, up and with what we're
putting in, what we're putting in place.
And
little kids, they believe what we tell them.
They don't have that wrong or right thing yet.
The bill is being promoted as a solution to
fish wastage,
but it could actually increase the amount of wastage in commercial fisheries.
Critics believe this bill prioritizes the commercial fishing
interest over the long-term health of marine ecosystems.
If we let this bill go through, we're actually not letting
anyone get a say in.
So as soon as the bill goes through, no one gets a say.
The minister can
increase the catchment as much as he want without even consulting anyone,
which in turn is going to
strip our oceans of their
natural wonders.
This bill introduces multi-year catch limits,
which changes fish populations. It produces
environmental pressures, and also it will crumple our
natural ecosystem's way of life. And
with all our bottom trawling that's
happening, and that if we let this bill go through, we're
allowing bottom trawling to continue and
strip the bottoms of our oceans away.
We're saying that we're going to allow undersized fish
to be caught, which is
prettyPretty bad.
And even if we are letting go of these sharks and rays that we throw off our
boats, they're still dying. We're actually pulling up heaps of
coral, heaps of their natural environments
as we're doing the bottom trawling, and then we're just leaving waste in our wake.
And we're saying, "Oh, yes. Well, no, we're getting money from it."
Well,
that's not the problem.
I don't know. This bill makes me feel like
it's profit over people.
I don't see much human input. I don't see much thought
into
what we think about it. Think about the Maori values, where
we would fish from the seas, explore them, not exploit them.
Our moana, they're a gift. They're not something we can
use to get money. That's not how it works.
Also, one thing,
if we
use this bill,
then we're allowing us,
the people of New Zealand, to have no view into what's actually happening.
Because you're banning us from being able to see
existing camera footage.
So if something's going on, something's wrong, and it's videoed,
we can't see that. We can't argue about it. We don't get a say.
You're removing the environmental safeguards,
weakening the environments just to
build this law and
I feel this bill needs to consider the future generations.
And I understand that the fisheries,
I understand that we need fish. We need to be
able to provide fish to other countries and things for
our external exports.
But surely we can find a way where we can balance our only
take as much as we can give.
Only having your slice of the cake,
not taking the whole cake in one go.
Thank you so much, Mia, and thank you for your time and for
being a voice-
Yeah
... for your generation and for participating in the democratic process.
It's awesome. So well done to you, and a shout-out to the students at
Taupō-nui a Tia College.
Oh, thank you.
Thank you.
Rex Chapman.
Oh, hi, Rex.
Just need to turn your sound,
unmute yourself.
Need to try and do that now.
Can we do it for him?
I've sent him a prompt to do it.
Yeah.
Right. Got it.
Oh, yep. Got you.
We're all good.
Okay. My name's-
Go ahead
... Rex. Oh, sorry.
You go.
My name's Rex Chapman. I'm the
captain of the Sealord fishing vessel, Te Kahu, deep
water trawler, 82 meter.
I'm actually at sea at the moment, so-
I was going to say. You sound like you're
I've got you on my phone. I've been a professional fisherman fishing for 40
years.
And,
I
support this bill, and
some of the reasons why.
I fish as an employee for Sealord. And I fish
efficiently and with a strong focus on
sustainability and utilizing our precious resources
carefully with the lightest footprint possible.
And
you'll find most professional fishermen of my level,
we've got skin in the game, and we want that.
The New Zealand fishery is heavily regulated and well managed.
I've fished in lots of other countries in the world, and New Zealand is second to
none
in that respect. I heard someone talking about we could learn lessons
from Australia. I fish in Australia, and they're fairly
comparable, our two systems. And
one thing that was different over there was they're allowed to
discard quoted species, which I thought was a backwards step when I first went
over there until I was talking to the observer one day, and he says, "So in New
Zealand,
if you've got a live quoted species that are bycatch, you're not allowed to put
it back in the water again and release it alive?" I said, "No, we're not."
And that sort of made me think a bit more about that.
I hear the argument that science is done by the fishing industry and is not
independent and could be manipulated.
I've done a lot of scientific voyages in my career with CSIRO, NIWA,
Deep Water Group, independent scientists, and observers.
Myself and my crews have put in many hours into stock assessment,
mitigation methods, and many types of collection of data and biological samples
in filming behavior underwater to try and mitigate bycatch.
We put in hours. We live and breathe it out here.
We're also involved in programs of releasing species alive with tags to check
survival rates of released fish.
We're best placed to do the science because we're out living on the ocean 12 months
of the year
and see it daily. Why would we manipulate data when it affects
our future and our children's future?
It's our livelihood.
It's absurd to even think of it.
Myself and my colleagues, we get quite sick and tired of all the
um-People portraying the industry as
greedy, dishonest people who wish to destroy the ocean and its
biodiversity.
Why would we want to destroy our livelihood and the future of all the young
people coming through?
We protect it. We see things that no one else sees, and we're best placed
to look at stuff.
In reality, we're a lot of hardworking, honest professionals who spend half our
lives living on the sea, providing good protein to feed the world.
We're heavily invested in the ocean and its sustainability for our
futures and our families' futures.
Most of us are also recreational fishermen as well.
A lot of our opponents prey on emotion and to make wild statements and
catastrophize about the state of the ocean with no science
or evidence.
As I've got older, I look more for one thing, the truth.
Good decisions can only be made with good information and good science,
whether in my job at sea or at a government level.
On the other side, decisions made with emotion and bad information lead
to bad outcomes and have unintended consequences to people.
I think cameras on vessels are a good thing.
I don't think the public should be available to
see the footage. I don't think it should be
the public need to
be involved in
the prosecution or the
sentiment against fishermen, but NPI should get the footage, and if there's
anything wrong, they should prosecute the people.
And as it is now, we have observers most of the time
on the boat.
I heard the observer before saying about boats without observers
catch
less birds, and ones with them catch less.
But in saying that, there's no skin off
my nose to report everything I catch,
and it's law. So you don't break the law
by
catching a bird, but you break the law by not reporting it.
And it doesn't affect me in any value or monetary, or it doesn't have
any effect on me. The company, they encourage me to--
Well, I'd be in trouble if I didn't report it, so. And it's not what we do.
We want to do that.
From my point of view, I'd rather release any species other than my target
species alive, if I could, back in the water.
And that sort of goes a bit with the minimum size limits.
I sort of see it from the side. I see what that guy was saying before, if it
couldn't be sold. Yep.
I don't think people will ever target small fish that I see.
Of the deep water also is different to the inshore.
So the stuff we catch,
any small fish, if it's dead, it should be kept.
If it's alive, my view is it should be put back in the water if it's likely
to survive.
There's no point
putting dead stuff. There's nothing of
value for me in having small fish on board. I don't get paid for it.
I'd get told off. I'd say, "What are you doing that?" And it's not what I do.
It's morally wrong. I wouldn't target small fish.
That's good.
I hope you guys fully understand what the changes will mean for good modern
fisheries management. And it's a bit more dynamic than being able
to change things at a
more timely rate.
Yeah, that's about all. I hear a lot of stuff about the depletion of
fisheries and recreational. As I say, we're outside
the recreational eye. We're deep water, so we're not really
involved in that. But
from where I live in Nelson, the snapper fishing's never been so good in
my lifetime. I've lived there all my life.
It's incredible. And what I see at sea is our stocks are well
managed.
Hey, okay. We're nearly at time, Rex, but Miles Anderson's got a quick question, so
I'll just pass you over to Miles.
Thanks, Rex. Look, I just would like your thoughts.
So there's been a lot of criticism of bottom trawling by a
number of submitters. What are your thoughts?
My thoughts are there's a lot of misinformation on the bottom trawling,
and it's 3% or something of the bottom.
We fish traditional areas that we've always fished.
The boat I'm on now, we're predominantly mid-water fishing most of the year,
so a bit lighter footprint, but we still do bottom trawl in areas where
I've fished for probably 20 or 30 years myself.
So we're not dredging up loads of coral and killing biodiversity and...
And the other thing I hear is that we're the only nation in
the high seas that still bottom trawls.
Well, the high seas is outside New Zealand's 200-mile limit.
It's not inside New Zealand's tight 200-mile limit.
So it's a wee bit of a play on words, that one.
And I don't think there's many New Zealand boats that even fish outside the
200-mile limit anyway, bottom trawlers now.
And
I think there's a lot of countries,
there's Korea and Russia and China, and there's a lot of people still
doing that. Our practices are really good in New
Zealand, and like I say, I've been all over the world and seen other people's
practices, and
yeah, what we do here is very professional.
Thank you very much, Rex. And thank you for dialing in from the sea.
That's very cool.
Thank you.
Okay,
bye.
Matthew.
Yes.
You're up.
Sorry.
Yeah. Have a seat. You can come up, too.
Get these two chairs.
You've probably heard
it enough times to know how it works, so here you go.
I think I have, yes.
What's your name?
Charlie.
Hi, Charlie.
Hey. Kia ora everyone. My name's Matthew Breach, and I'm here to speak against this
bill.
Tuatahi, he uri ahau o Ngati Porou.
Ko Ngati Porou, ko a Harataunga to ku hapu.
However, although I come here with my Maori kaitiaki potae
on, I also come here on behalf of all New Zealanders and all those
who love the sea and gather kai to feed our families and communities.
I come here as a recreational fisherman of over 40 years, and the son and the
grandson of two passionate recreational fishermen before me.
I'm a primary school teacher, and I've always brought the passion and
love of the sea into my classrooms.
I'm a trainee skipper
and a charter skipper and owner of a hunting and fishing tourism business
as well. And lastly, I come here as the father of a daughter who loves
Tangaroa just as much as her dad.
I don't know how you fit that all into a day.
What's that?
How do you fit all that into a day?
Yeah, I'm a busy man.
The fish and the kai moana of this country have always
been a public resource, and it's one of the most precious taonga we have.
The fisheries of New Zealand are in crisis.
In my own time, I've seen scallop fisheries collapse, crayfish
populations dwindle, and once famous offshore
reefs become devoid of the deep water species that made them famous in the first
place.
Over generations, we've seen this decline for as long as I can remember.
The recreational groups and the environmental activists have pleaded to successive
governments, and sadly, the response is usually to cut the recreational
catch from six crayfish to three, from 10 paua to
five, from 10 snapper to seven.
Each time this happens, we recreational fishermen grumble begrudgingly,
but we eventually succumb because we want to do our part.
What has been the ultimate kick in the guts is that over that same time period,
we've seen commercial catch limits either stay the same or increase.
My specific parts of my written submission that I'd like to speak to today are as
follows. I would like to see access to free or affordable fish
to all of our population. I'm not
anti-commercial. Some of my best friends are commercial fishermen,
but they are hamstrung by the low per kilo rate that they
receive from the people who own the quota.
I have a friend who is a
commercial fisherman, and in his time, he was paid 50 cents per
kilo for tarakihi, and then somehow that turns into
$40 a kilo in the supermarket. I think there's a mismatch there that we need to
look at. Fish dumping, I think that's the probably
biggest problem we have. The stupidity of the whole scenario is
beyond me.
And it's not currently just the undersized fish that are
getting dumped. I have firsthand accounts from fishermen who
are putting species like yellowfin tuna
back overboard because they're not the right shape, size, or weight.
Bottom trawling has to stop. It's too destructive.
The research is clear, and the rest of the world has woken up to that.
My recommendations is to feed New Zealand first and put profits last.
As mentioned before, this resource is all of ours, and we all have to have a
contribution on how it's managed.
I believe the ditching of the quota system needs to happen and we reinvent the
wheel.
Rotating non-commercial take areas five years per region
with compensation for local fishermen.
Full transparency from big companies on methods, practices,
introducing cameras.
The benefits is honoring Te Tiriti for our Maori population, health
benefits for New Zealanders with access to healthy food at a reasonable
price.
Increased biomass means sustainable commercial methods can happen,
and families will participate more.
You want to get your kid off an iPad, give them a fishing rod-
... or
a snorkel and a mask.
I heard the fisheries minister speak this week that we need a bill of
some sorts, and on that, I couldn't agree more.
The only way to remediate the state of our ocean is through full public
consultation of all sectors and a raft of legislative
changes that aren't based on a 40-year-old system not fit for purpose
anymore.
To the Minister of Fisheries, Kia tupato, your ancestors are
watching,
and so are your moko.
How about you actually put New Zealand first, feed our own people,
and be the kaitiaki you're supposed to be.
I'd like to finish with a ohake of Te Wharepou, a local chief.
"I muri nei kia pai taku taonga Maori, taonga Pakeha.
Kia tae ake te haruru o to reo ki ahau i te
reinga." After I've gone,
be good to my Maori and my Pakeha people.
Let the thunder of your voice reach me in the spirit land.
In this context, we are future-focused.
Are we future-focused in our decision-making?
Are we considering the treasures of both Maori and non-Maori?
And are we being good ancestors for the next generation?
Let this be the touchstone for your mahi here today.
No reira, tena koutou, tena koutou, tena koutou katoa.
Ngā mihi. Thank you. I've just got one quick question.
Yes.
Thank you very much for your submission. It was awesome.
You talked about your mate that was catching tarakihi for
50 cents a kilo.
Yeah.
So was that a commercial arrangement?
Yes.
So that was a deal that he made with the person that owned the quota.
That's how it is for most of-
Right. So do you think the quot-- So that's not really a
legislative issue.
No.
But do you think the quota system needs to change?
I think so.
That people that hold the quota should be using the quota to fish.
I think there needs to be a way to get the food from the fishermen to the
people without all the middle people clipping the ticket so
that everyone can get affordable seafood.The health benefits to the
country would be massive. I don't know, you guys will crunch the numbers-
Yeah
... and stuff like that, but can you imagine the obesity and the diabetes stuff if
you can get reasonably priced seafood? I don't know.
So your mate owns the boat, but the person that owns the quota-
Well, he ended up giving up
... doesn't own the boat.
He ended up giving up because it wasn't sustainable.
So he did own the boat, he caught the fish, but
the
value for the fish he was getting was making it non-profitable.
And so it ends up all just going back to big companies.
Yeah.
That's really interesting.
All right.
Thank you.
Kia ora.
Thank you so much.
Thank
you. Nice to meet you, Charlie.
If you move the grab pack down from the...
See if you can get it.
Oh, now you need to... Oh, I'll get this one. Oh, hi, sorry, Trish.
That's all right.
How are you?
I'm very good. Kia ora team, my name is Trish Ray, and I am here
because I'm concerned about our kids and our mokopuna will
not enjoy the abundance from the ocean that past
generations have enjoyed if this bill progresses.
I want to tell you about three fisheries, not in the abstract,
but three actual stocks in New Zealand waters that have been
managed using the same methods that this bill
proposes to enshrine in law, and I want
to tell you what's happened to them.
The first one is Tarakihi 1, and it's on the
northeast coast. For years, catch per
unit of effort, which is CPUE, said the stock
was manageable.
Catch rates were holding, and the model was okay.
Meanwhile, independent trawl surveys, the
surveys that count actual fish rather than measure
how easily they are caught, were showing a
population in serious decline.
Scientists were raising the alarm, but the
CPUE signal said carry on, and
the stock did not carry on, and it's now fallen to a
level that will likely trigger an urgent
review this year, and catch reductions that should have
come years ago may now only come this year.
The window for easy recovery has closed for that
fishery.
Then we talk about rock lobster, crayfish on the northeast
coast again. On the Commission of Fisheries New Zealand, an
international panel of independent scientists
reviewed our management procedures in 2024
and explicitly warned against relying on
CPUE as the primary indicator of
abundance. The warning was documented.
It was on the record, and management procedures continued
anyway. The Cray 1 stock has since collapsed.
There is now a genuine scientific uncertainty
whether it can recover to commercially viable levels
within a generation.
Then we have Blue Nose, a deep water stock.
Slow to mature, slow to reproduce, and slow to
recover from pressure. The kind of species for which
the precautionary principle was invented.
The CPUE data tracked well for an extended
period. The stock, as independent surveys have
shown, did not. Catch limits were set too high
for too long, and a slow reproducing
species has paid the price in a currency that
it can barely afford, years of future
productivity.
That's just three stocks using the same method
and the same failure. CPUE does not
count fish. It measures how easily fish are caught.
So when a fleet becomes more experienced, uses
better technology, and becomes more skilled at finding the
remaining fish in a shrinking population,
CPUE stays stable,
yet the stock continues to fall. Scientists call
this hyperstability. It's not a new concept, and
it's not disputed. It's documented in
international literature, and it has now been
documented in our own waters with our own
species under our own supposedly
world-leading quota management system.
And the bill proposes to make CPUE based management
procedures the centerpiece of New Zealand fisheries
management.
It proposes to automate catch limit decisions
based on an indicator with a proven tendency
to miss stock collapses, and it
proposes to put the rules governing those procedures
into ministerial instruments below the
level of parliamentary scrutiny with a 20-day
window for legal challenge.
So we've got Tarakihi 1, we've got Crayfish 1,
and we've got Blue Nose 1.
These are not predictions. They are on record,
and the committee is being asked to legislate the same approach that
produced these outcomes. And I'm asking you here
today, don't do thatThe evidence is
already in, the cost has already been paid by the
fish and by every New Zealander who depends on
healthy seas. We need to kill the bill.
Thank you for your time.
I'd have to say, Trish, that was an exceptional submission.
Thank you very much, and it was really informative and very passionate and
heartfelt. Thank you.
Does anyone-
No. She answered all the questions there.
Yeah. Miles did have a question at one stage, but you answered it
in your next couple of sentences.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Ka kite.
Yeah. Yeah, that's one for you.
But yeah.
We don't really.
I'll stay.
Okay.
Less. Does anyone else want to speak?
Yeah.
Cody.
Kia ora, Cody.
Oh, you just need to take yourself off mute.
Perfect.
How's that?
All right?
That's great. Welcome to the Primary Production Select Committee.
You've got five minutes, which goes pretty quickly.
So the floor is yours.
Okay.
Hi, everyone. My name is Cody Hunt.
A recreational fisher in the Hauraki Gulf.
A boat owner for 16 years, and I've been out on the water since I could
crawl.
I was taught to fish by my father, and I'm desperately trying to pass those
lessons on to my twin boys.
Over these 16 years, I've seen a heartbreaking decline.
10 years ago, I could shoot out after work for a quick fish in the
Rangitoto or Monai Channels and easily bring home a feed for my
family.
Today,
a whole weekend of effort often ends in a struggle to find even one legal fish.
The biblical numbers of snapper the minister talks about are a fantasy.
They certainly don't match the reality on my sounder or in my chilly
bin.
I'm being locked out of 12 new high protection areas in
the name of conservation.
I can accept that, but I cannot accept the blatant double
standard that allows commercial ring netting and trawling to
continue right next to or even within these zones.
It is a gut punch as a father to tell him he can't
take his kids fishing for a kahawai in these areas while a commercial boat
is allowed to come up
and sweep up tons in the same spot.
If it's a nursery, it should be a nursery for everyone.
No exceptions, no loopholes, and
absolutely no special treatment for industry.
The bill reduces transparency by making it harder to see camera
footage.
If the industry has nothing to hide,
why lock the doors?
I know what happens when no one's watching.
Growing up, our family came to Waipu Cove.
I vividly remember seeing commercial boats on the horizon near the Hen and
Chicken Islands.
The next day, the beach was covered in dead snapper.
We spent the afternoon on the water and a trail of dead fish floating across the
Bream Bay.
The old-timers at the camp told me it was standard practice, and that
if they catch a fresher batch, they dump the old stuff.
That scarred me. It showed me how careless and wasteful these businesses
can be.
I'm asking this committee to kill the bill.
At the very least, remove the loopholes that allow commercial mates to keep
stripping the HPAs, while families like mine are restricted to
overfished grounds.
Don't let our heritage be traded for commercial profit.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, Cody. Do you have any questions?
Yeah.
Got a question from Miles Anderson.
Sure.
Yeah. Thanks for your submission, Cody.
A couple of submitters talked about the difference between inshore
and deep sea fisheries. Have you any insights
into the difference of those?
I'm not a professional fisherman, I'm recreational.
Yeah.
So from my point of view, it's just I've seen the
decline and
I just want to be able to go out and get a feed and take my
family out and have fun on the water.
The HPAs and stuff I think are a great idea but, like I say, it has to be
for everyone.
You can't say that I can't fish there and then go get a big net and trawl
through there and take it all. But it's
about being fair
and
leave it up to the professionals to discuss what
sort of quota limits and things like that,
obviously,
right for the industry.
Thanks, Cody.
Awesome. Thank you very much for taking the time to talk to us. That's awesome.
Thank you very much.
See you, Cody.
Really appreciate it.
No
worries.
Bye.
Right.
So have you have any